Add ambient helm installation guide (#13871)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ops/ambient/helm-installation/index.md

---
title: Installing Ambient Mesh with Helm
description: How to install Ambient Mesh with Helm.
weight: 4
owner: istio/wg-environments-maintainers
test: n/a
---

This guide shows you how to install Ambient Mesh with Helm.
Besides the demo in [Getting Started with Ambient Mesh](/docs/ops/ambient/getting-started/),
we **encourage** you to follow this guide to install Ambient Mesh.
Helm helps you manage components separately, and you can easily upgrade the components to the latest version.

## Setup Repo Info

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm repo add istio https://istio-release.storage.googleapis.com/charts
$ helm repo update
{{< /text >}}

*See [helm repo](https://helm.sh/docs/helm/helm_repo/) for command documentation.*

## Installing the Components

### Installing Base Component

The **Base** chart contains the basic CRDs and cluster roles required to set up Istio.
This should be installed prior to any other Istio component.

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm install istio-base istio/base
{{< /text >}}

### Installing CNI Component

The **CNI** chart installs the Istio CNI Plugin. There are some main roles of Istio CNI Plugin:

> 1. Eliminates the need for the `istio-init` container that sets up traffic routing for sidecar proxies.

Reviewer: Perhaps we should mention (with a link) that this is a safe, more secure security practice and link to the Istio Best Security practices page

Author: Sounds great

Reviewer 2: This is a bit confusing here since its for ambient where there is no sidecar. I mean technically its correct, since you can still use sidecars... but the motivation is not this; the motivation is that its a hard requirement for ambient.

Author: Thanks, I've removed the sidecar part to not confuse users.

> 1. In Ambient, it is responsible for detecting the pods that belong to the ambient mesh, and configuring 

Reviewer 3: Remove trailing space to fix lint
```suggestion
1. In Ambient, it is responsible for detecting the pods that belong to the ambient mesh, and configuring
```

Author: Thanks, I was trying to figure out where's the trailing space :)

  the traffic redirection between the ztunnels - which will be installed later.

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm install istio-cni istio/cni -n kube-system \
    --set cni.ambient.enabled=true \
    --set cni.logLevel=info \
    --set cni.privileged=true \

>     --set 'cni.excludeNamespaces={kube-system}'

Author: CNI default value excludes `istio-system` as well, which should work in ambient.

{{< /text >}}

### Installing Istiod Component

The **Istiod** chart installs a revision of Istiod. Istiod is the control plane component that manages and
configures the proxies to route traffic within the mesh.

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl create namespace istio-system
$ helm install istiod istio/istiod --namespace istio-system \
    --set defaultRevision="" \
    --set meshConfig.defaultConfig.proxyMetadata.ISTIO_META_ENABLE_HBONE=true \
    --set 'meshConfig.defaultProviders.metrics[0]=prometheus' \
    --set 'meshConfig.extensionProviders[0].name=prometheus' \

>     --set 'meshConfig.extensionProviders[0].prometheus={}' \

Reviewer: We should probably remove these settings since not all of our users will have prometheus installed.

    --set 'pilot.env.VERIFY_CERTIFICATE_AT_CLIENT=true' \
    --set 'pilot.env.ENABLE_AUTO_SNI=true' \
    --set 'pilot.env.PILOT_ENABLE_HBONE=true' \
    --set 'pilot.env.PILOT_ENABLE_AMBIENT_CONTROLLERS=true' \

>     --set 'pilot.env.CA_TRUSTED_NODE_ACCOUNTS=istio-system/ztunnel\,kube-system/ztunnel' \

Reviewer: Does it make sense for us to ship istiod with an `ambient-values.yaml` file for both cni and for istiod?

Reviewer: See https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/46994

Author: Yes, it does. It looks like it's easier to maintain. Thanks for the value YAML files!

and configuring the traffic redirection between the ztunnel DaemonSet, which will be installed later.

{{< text syntax=bash snip_id=install_cni >}}
$ helm install istio-cni istio/cni -n istio-system \
  -f @manifests/charts/istio-cni/ambient-values.yaml@
{{< /text >}}

### Installing the discovery Component

The `istiod` chart installs a revision of Istiod. Istiod is the control plane component that manages and
configures the proxies to route traffic within the mesh.

{{< text syntax=bash snip_id=install_discovery >}}
$ helm install istiod istio/istiod --namespace istio-system \
  -f @manifests/charts/istio-control/istio-discovery/ambient-values.yaml@
{{< /text >}}

### Installing the ztunnel component

The `ztunnel` chart installs the ztunnel DaemonSet, which is the node-proxy component of ambient.

{{< text syntax=bash snip_id=install_ztunnel >}}
$ helm install ztunnel istio/ztunnel -n istio-system
{{< /text >}}

## Configuration

To view support configuration options and documentation, run:

{{< text syntax=bash >}}
$ helm show values istio/istiod
{{< /text >}}

## Verifying the Installation

### Verifying the deployments status

> After installing all the components, you can check the helm deployment status:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After installing all the components, you can check the Helm deployment status with:
```

{{< text syntax=bash snip_id=show_components >}}
$ helm list -n istio-system
{{< /text >}}

> You can check the status of the pods deployed:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can check the status of the deployed pods with:
```

    {{< text syntax=bash >}}
    $ helm delete istio-ingress -n istio-ingress
    $ kubectl delete namespace istio-ingress
    {{< /text >}}

1. Delete Istio CNI chart:

    {{< text syntax=bash snip_id=delete_cni >}}
    $ helm delete istio-cni -n istio-system
    {{< /text >}}

1. Delete Istio ztunnel chart:

    {{< text syntax=bash snip_id=delete_ztunnel >}}
    $ helm delete ztunnel -n istio-system
    {{< /text >}}

1. Delete Istio discovery chart:

    {{< text syntax=bash snip_id=delete_discovery >}}
    $ helm delete istiod -n istio-system
    {{< /text >}}

1. Delete Istio base chart:

    {{< tip >}}
    By design, deleting a chart via Helm doesn't delete the installed Custom
    Resource Definitions (CRDs) installed via the chart.
    {{< /tip >}}

    {{< text syntax=bash snip_id=delete_base >}}
    $ helm delete istio-base -n istio-system
    {{< /text >}}

1. Delete the `istio-system` namespace:

    {{< text syntax=bash snip_id=delete_system_namespace >}}
    $ kubectl delete namespace istio-system
    {{< /text >}}

## Uninstall stable revision label resources

If you decide to continue using the old control plane, instead of completing the update,

> you can uninstall the newer revision and its tag by first issuing
> `helm template istiod istio/istiod -s templates/revision-tags.yaml --set revisionTags={prod-canary} --set revision=canary -n istio-system | kubectl delete -f -`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
you can uninstall the newer revision and its tag by first running:

{{< text syntax=bash >}}
$ helm template istiod istio/istiod -s templates/revision-tags.yaml --set revisionTags={prod-canary} --set revision=canary -n istio-system | kubectl delete -f -
{{< /text >}}

```

Author: Thanks for all comments, revised.

Author: This cannot be revised, otherwise we will violate some lint rules. This is actually copied from https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/helm/#uninstall-stable-revision-label-resources.

> You must them uninstall the revision of Istio that it pointed to by following the uninstall procedure above.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You must then uninstall the revision of Istio by following the uninstall procedure above.
```

> If you installed the gateway(s) for this revision using in-place upgrades, you must also reinstall the gateway(s) for the previous revision manually,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you installed the gateway(s) for this revision using in-place upgrades, you must also reinstall the gateway(s) for the previous revision manually.
```

> Removing the previous revision and its tags will not automatically revert the previously in-place upgraded gateway(s).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Removing the previous revision and its tags will not automatically revert the previously upgraded gateway(s).
```

### (Optional) Deleting CRDs installed by Istio

> Deleting CRDs permanently removes any Istio resources you have created in your
> cluster. To permanently delete Istio CRDs installed in your cluster:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Deleting CRDs removes any Istio resources you have created in your cluster. To delete Istio CRDs installed in your cluster:
```

---
title: Installing Ambient Mesh with Helm
description: How to install Ambient Mesh with Helm.
weight: 4
owner: istio/wg-environments-maintainers
test: n/a
---

This guide shows you how to install Ambient Mesh with Helm.
Besides the demo in [Getting Started with Ambient Mesh](/docs/ops/ambient/getting-started/),
we **encourage** you to follow this guide to install Ambient Mesh.

> Helm helps you manage components separately, and you can easily upgrade the components to the latest version.

Reviewer 5: I feel like it should be obvious by this point, but we should maybe add a note that we only support Helm 3 and newer.

Author: Thanks, I've added the prerequisite step copied from the normal helm installation [https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/helm/.](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/helm/#prerequisites)

Reviewer 6: +1 on helm 3.x plus

Author: Right now we have the requirement of helm version to be 3.6+ in the helm installation guide https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/helm/#prerequisites, shouldn't we use the same value for consistency?

## Setup Repo Info

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm repo add istio https://istio-release.storage.googleapis.com/charts
$ helm repo update
{{< /text >}}

*See [helm repo](https://helm.sh/docs/helm/helm_repo/) for command documentation.*

## Installing the Components

### Installing Base Component

The **Base** chart contains the basic CRDs and cluster roles required to set up Istio.
This should be installed prior to any other Istio component.

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm install istio-base istio/base
{{< /text >}}

> ### Installing CNI Component

Reviewer 7: Is CNI necessary for Ambient?  It isn't installed by istioctl install as far as I can tell....

Reviewer 5: It should be installed with the `ambient` profile and yea it is.

Reviewer 4: It is mandatory.. the CNI component handles all the redirection logic for both the node and pods. Without it, the pods won't be put into the ambient mesh.

The **CNI** chart installs the Istio CNI Plugin. It is responsible for detecting the pods that belong to the ambient mesh,
and configuring the traffic redirection between the ztunnels - which will be installed later.

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm install istio-cni istio/cni -n kube-system \
  -f @manifests/charts/istio-cni/ambient-values.yaml@
{{< /text >}}

### Installing Istiod Component

The **Istiod** chart installs a revision of Istiod. Istiod is the control plane component that manages and
configures the proxies to route traffic within the mesh.

{{< text bash >}}

> $ kubectl create namespace istio-system
> $ helm install istiod istio/istiod --namespace istio-system \
>   -f @manifests/charts/istio-control/istio-discovery/ambient-values.yaml@

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
$ helm install istiod istio/istiod --namespace istio-system --create-namespace \
  -f @manifests/charts/istio-control/istio-discovery/ambient-values.yaml@
```

---
title: Installing Ambient Mesh with Helm
description: How to install Ambient Mesh with Helm.
weight: 4
owner: istio/wg-environments-maintainers
test: n/a
---

> This guide shows you how to install Ambient Mesh with Helm.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This guide shows you how to install ambient mesh with Helm.
```

Besides the demo in [Getting Started with Ambient Mesh](/docs/ops/ambient/getting-started/),

> we **encourage** you to follow this guide to install Ambient Mesh.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
we **encourage** you to follow this guide to install ambient mesh.
```

Helm helps you manage components separately, and you can easily upgrade the components to the latest version.

## Prerequisites

1. Perform any necessary [platform-specific setup](/docs/setup/platform-setup/).

1. Check the [Requirements for Pods and Services](/docs/ops/deployment/requirements/).

1. [Install the Helm client](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/), version 3.6 or above.

1. Configure the Helm repository:

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ helm repo add istio https://istio-release.storage.googleapis.com/charts
> $ helm repo update
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ helm repo add istio https://istio-release.storage.googleapis.com/charts
    $ helm repo update
    {{< /text >}}
```

Reviewer 4: Indenting keeps it "under" the ordered list item instead of breaking out of the list, and allows for further additions without needing to worry about numbering in the future.

*See [helm repo](https://helm.sh/docs/helm/helm_repo/) for command documentation.*

## Installing the Components

> ### Installing Base Component

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Installing the Base Component
```

> The **Base** chart contains the basic CRDs and cluster roles required to set up Istio.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `base` chart contains the basic CRDs and cluster roles required to set up Istio.
```

This should be installed prior to any other Istio component.

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm install istio-base istio/base
{{< /text >}}

> ### Installing CNI Component

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Installing the CNI Component
```

> {{< text bash >}}

Reviewer 5: Unrelated aside: I still think eventually we should/ought to get this down to 2 charts: `istio-dataplane` and `istio-controlplane` - installed separately, upgraded separately.

Author: So, in this case, where should `istio-cni` be placed? I thought it was required in ambient to configure data plane, but it seems more like a network helper in the default sidecar mode, which neither belongs to the data plane nor the control plane?

Reviewer 5: Right now `istio-cni` and `ztunnel` are effectively both part of the dataplane.

`istio-cni` isn't part of the dataplane at runtime, but it must be installed with (and upgraded with) the dataplane, in most cases, at the current time.

> The **CNI** chart installs the Istio CNI Plugin. It is responsible for detecting the pods that belong to the ambient mesh,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `cni` chart installs the Istio CNI Plugin. It is responsible for detecting the pods that belong in the ambient mesh,
```

Reviewer 4: I feel like we should also mention its sidecar purpose here... since it isn't only for ambient. This, to me, eludes to the CNI only being used for ambient. Maybe link to the CNI page?

Reviewer 6: yep worth noting this is the same cni from before but with expanded function to configure traffic redirection from app to ztunnel

Author: I added the sidecar mode explaination before, however I see the motivation of ambient here https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/13871#discussion_r1327736697, which makes sense to me.

Reviewer 4: The suggested change here still is outstanding.

> and configuring the traffic redirection between the ztunnels - which will be installed later.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and configuring the traffic redirection between the ztunnel daemonset, which will be installed later.
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm install istio-cni istio/cni -n kube-system \
  -f @manifests/charts/istio-cni/ambient-values.yaml@
{{< /text >}}

> ### Installing Istiod Component

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Installing the Istiod Component
```

>   -f manifests/charts/istio-cni/ambient-values.yaml

Reviewer: This will only be for those that have downloaded the charts. If you are using the Helm repo you'll need to give the full URL to the ambient values file, such as `-f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/master/manifests/charts/istio-cni/ambient-values.yaml`

Reviewer 5: Can also use the Istio.io code import: https://preliminary.istio.io/latest/docs/releases/contribute/code-blocks/#import-code-from-an-external-source-through-a-url and render (that version of the file) inline in the doc for copypasting, like so, which might be a little more obvious:

```
helm install istio-cni istio/cni -n kube-system -f - << EOF
cni:
  # Configuration log level of istio-cni binary
  # by default istio-cni send all logs to UDS server
  # if want to see them you need change global.logging.level with cni:debug
  logLevel: info

  # Allow the istio-cni container to run in privileged mode, needed for some platforms (e.g. OpenShift)
  privileged: true

  # Configure ambient settings
  ambient:
    # If enabled, ambient redirection will be enabled
    enabled: true

  # Default excludes istio-system; its actually fine to redirect there since we opt-out istiod, ztunnel, and istio-cni
  excludeNamespaces:
  - kube-system
EOF
```

Reviewer 5: TBQH if base case requires a large values file for default/demo install, that's a good signal we have too many values - for instance in the above example it's not clear that `privileged` couldn't simply be implicitly set to true if `ambient.enabled` is true, and dropped from the values file.

Author: > Can also use the Istio.io code import: https://preliminary.istio.io/latest/docs/releases/contribute/code-blocks/#import-code-from-an-external-source-through-a-url and render (that version of the file) inline in the doc for copypasting, like so, which might be a little more obvious

I'm going to try this to see if it works, thanks for the info!

Author: > TBQH if base case requires a large values file for default/demo install, that's a good signal we have too many values with unreasonable defaults - for instance in the above example it's not clear that privileged couldn't simply be implicitly set to true if ambient.enabled is true, and dropped from the ambient values file.

I think this makes the components easier to install, but it may potentially lack flexibility because users may want to change a subset of values under the 'grouped' `ambient.enabled`, rather than the entire set. Additionally, having separate values can help indicate the differences between the original mode and the ambient mode, which is useful for users who are migrating from the sidecar mode to ambient. Given this, IMO if Ambient is defined as a separate default configuration, it might be better to simplify the Helm install, and otherwise it may be better to keep the current settings.

Author: Looks like we cannot have embeded texts...
<img width="595" alt="image" src="https://github.com/istio/istio.io/assets/20888172/8704b3bb-a4e4-4a84-b070-940be27597e1">
Maybe just revise to https://preliminary.istio.io/latest/docs/releases/contribute/code-blocks/#link-2-files?

Reviewer 5: > > TBQH if base case requires a large values file for default/demo install, that's a good signal we have too many values with unreasonable defaults - for instance in the above example it's not clear that privileged couldn't simply be implicitly set to true if ambient.enabled is true, and dropped from the ambient values file.
> 
> I think this makes the components easier to install, but it may potentially lack flexibility because users may want to change a subset of values under the 'grouped' `ambient.enabled`, rather than the entire set. Additionally, having separate values can help indicate the differences between the original mode and the ambient mode, which is useful for users who are migrating from the sidecar mode to ambient. Given this, IMO if Ambient is defined as a separate default configuration, it might be better to simplify the Helm install, and otherwise it may be better to keep the current settings.

If they have a legitimate need to do that we can add that later. It's much easier to expose something as an option after the fact when someone makes a case for it then it is to un-expose when it's clear no one really needs to individually set it.

We should expose the minimal set of things as `values` that are required to install Istio across the platforms and environments we support - everything beyond that, people can make a case for in a PR.

In the case of `privileged` here for the CNI there's no real case for us to let that be individually toggleable outside of the `ambient` flag - it has to be true for the `ambient` feature to work, and even if we change that as an implementation detail, there's no reason not to make it implicit, since users changing it to anything else if they set the other flag would be an explicit misconfiguration.

Author: Thanks for clarifying this, makes sense.

>   -f manifests/charts/istio-cni/ambient-values.yaml

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  -f manifests/charts/istio-cni/ambient-values.yaml
```

This specific `values.yaml` only has about 3 values overrides from the base case/default.

In terms of docs, my rule of thumb is 

1. If your `custom-values.yaml` override overrides 3 or fewer fields, docs should use individual `--set` flags and not a `-f file.yaml` flag.

2. If your `custom-values.yaml` override overrides 4 or more fields, docs should use a `-f file.yaml` flag and not individual `--set` flags. Also, if this is a common/base case, you might need to consider if you really need users to explicitly override that many things for the base case, versus implicitly setting some of the values based on other values, as a followup.

> The **Istiod** chart installs a revision of Istiod. Istiod is the control plane component that manages and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `istiod` chart installs a revision of Istiod. Istiod is the control plane component that manages and
```

configures the proxies to route traffic within the mesh.

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm install istiod istio/istiod --namespace istio-system --create-namespace \
  -f @manifests/charts/istio-control/istio-discovery/ambient-values.yaml@
{{< /text >}}

> ### Installing Ztunnel Component

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Installing the ztunnel component
```

> The **Ztunnel** chart installs a ztunnel, which is the node-proxy component in Ambient.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `ztunnel` chart installs the ztunnel daemonset, which is the node-proxy component of ambient.
```

>   -f manifests/charts/istio-control/istio-discovery/ambient-values.yaml

Reviewer 5: Yeah for `istiod` the number of overrides is larger so we are stuck with a `-f` flag file ref.

For now that's fine, maybe later we can streamline that or collapse multiple values behind a flag (since `ambient` is a base case, going forward).

Author: Not seeing this when I replied the early comment, so are we assuming `ambient` is a new base case compared to the default sidecar mode? If so I'd think we could optimize the values to provide better UX.
